CMP-4040, CMP-4041: Add support for CEL based rules and profiles (#14597)
ComplianceAsCode/content: .claude/CLAUDE.md

        pkgname@ubuntu2204: avahi-daemon    # Platform-specific overrides
```

## CEL Checking Engine (Kubernetes/OpenShift)

CEL (Common Expression Language) provides native Kubernetes resource evaluation without requiring shell access or OVAL checks. Rules using the CEL checking engine are used by the compliance-operator for Kubernetes and OpenShift compliance scanning.

> **Important:** Rules with CEL checks are **excluded** from XCCDF/OVAL DataStreams and are generated as a separate `${PRODUCT}-cel-content.yaml` file.

Reviewer: Data streams are always "data streams", never "DataStreams", "datastreams" or anything else.

```suggestion
**Important:** Rules with CEL checks are **excluded** from XCCDF/OVAL data streams and are generated as a separate `${PRODUCT}-cel-content.yaml` file.
```

### Rule Structure for CEL Checks

Rules using CEL checks use a **split-file structure** to separate metadata from CEL-specific content:

- **`rule.yml`** - Contains metadata (title, description, rationale, severity, references, etc.)
- **`cel/shared.yml`** - Contains CEL-specific fields (check_type, inputs, expression)

This allows rules to support **both CEL and OVAL** checks during migration from OVAL to CEL.

**Example rule.yml:**
```yaml
documentation_complete: true

title: 'Rule Title'

description: |-
    Description of what the rule checks.

rationale: |-
    Why this rule matters.

severity: medium

ocil: |-                   # Optional: Manual check instructions
    Run the following command:
    <pre>$ oc get pods</pre>

> failure_reason: |-          # Optional: Custom failure message

Author: @Mab879 Not sure what you mean, the docs already mention `failure_reason`.
Do you mean that I should remove the example CEL rule from this file?

> failure_reason: |-          # Optional: Custom failure message

Reviewer 2: I don't see it in master? What am I missing?

```
$ git log | head -n 1
commit 8aa33003dd0b592890cc10dd721e7188f9aff1e7
$ rg failure_reason | wc -l
0
```

> failure_reason: |-          # Optional: Custom failure message

Author: `failure_reason` is a new addition with the CEL rules.
I mean't that it is already included in the docs by this PR:
https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/content/pull/14597/changes#diff-6677deb44ddd63addff39669e91c53ce342e70cd624311e1ba3fece2553b152cR302
https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/content/pull/14597/changes#diff-e78e366696bcab816f5e520367ce312a4d89b7149dd71f083929a94bca4bdab4R971
https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/content/pull/14597/changes#diff-18b10cfaa14ba9c3f948c924817cf788b4809e80219e3db1fb1ef120bec1fd1dR66

I realize now that it should probably be moved to the `cel/shared.yaml` file.

```yaml
check_type: Platform        # Usually Platform for K8s checks

expression: |-             # REQUIRED: CEL expression (must evaluate to boolean)
    resource.spec.enabled == true

inputs:                    # REQUIRED: Kubernetes resources to evaluate
  - name: resource
    kubernetes_input_spec:
      api_version: v1
      resource: pods
      resource_name: my-pod          # Optional: specific resource
      resource_namespace: default    # Optional: specific namespace
```

**Note:** The build system automatically detects rules with CEL checks by the presence of the `cel/` directory.

### CEL Expression Examples

Simple boolean check:
```yaml
expression: resource.spec.enabled == true
```

Check for field absence:
```yaml
expression: !has(resource.spec.insecureField)
```

Multiple conditions:
```yaml
expression: |-
    resource.spec.replicas >= 3 &&
    has(resource.spec.securityContext) &&
    resource.spec.securityContext.runAsNonRoot == true
```

### CEL Profile Format

Profiles that select rules using CEL checks must have `scanner_type: CEL`:

```yaml
documentation_complete: true

title: 'CIS VM Extension Benchmark'

description: |-
    Profile description.

> scanner_type: CEL    # REQUIRED: Marks this as a CEL profile (excluded from XCCDF)

Reviewer: This says it's required but it isn't used in any of the rules in the PR.

selections:
    - kubevirt-nonroot-feature-gate-is-enabled
    - kubevirt-no-permitted-host-devices
```

**Note:** 

> - Profiles use `scanner_type: CEL` to indicate they target the CEL checking engine and should be excluded from XCCDF/datastream builds.

Reviewer: What determines if a rule is included in CEL and if it's included in XCCDF? Is that determined by rule presence in profiles?

Author: All CEL rules loaded are included in the cel-content.yaml.
https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/content/pull/14597/changes#diff-ce6393057aed5d58cf51f7e13532a07ec0063429a773d3e177e5eabfefe305a7R364

- A rule can have both `cel/` (for CEL checks) and `template:` (for OVAL checks) to support both checking engines during migration.

**Important:** Use hyphens rule IDs (Kubernetes naming convention), not underscores.

### Enabling CEL Content for a Product

In `products/${PRODUCT}/CMakeLists.txt`:

```cmake
set(PRODUCT "ocp4")
set(PRODUCT_CEL_ENABLED TRUE)  # Enable CEL content generation
ssg_build_product(${PRODUCT})
```

> See `docs/manual/developer/12_cel_content.md` for complete CEL documentation.

Reviewer: it should be 13_cel_content.md not 12
